# 8.5 Applications of Queues
## Chapter Overview:
- A queue is a linear data structure that follows FIFO (First In, First Out)
    - The element added first is removed first
- Insertions happen at the end and deletions happen at the beginning
- Works similar to a grocery store line: the first in line is served first

## Key Concepts:
- Implementation of Queues:
    - Can be stored in memory using:
        - Arrays
        - Linked Lists
- Types of Queues:
    - Linear Queues:
        - Usually implemented using arrays
        - One problem is a wasted space after deletion because as the front moves forward, the freed space can't be reused
    - Circular Queues:
        - The last index connects back to index 0 (last position is connected to the first position), which solves the memory wastage problem of linear queues
            - Is an efficient use of array space
    - Linked Queues:
        - Implemented using a linked list where the size is not fixed
            - Memory usage grows as needed and enqueue/dequeue operations have a time complexity of O(1)
    - Deque (Double-Ended Queue): 
        - Elements can be inserted or deleted on either end, but there are no operations allowed in the middle
        - Implemented using:
            - Circular Array
            - Circular Doubly Linked List
        - Types:
            - Input-restricted deque: insertion at one end, deletion at both
            - Output-restricted deque: deletion at one end, insertion at both 
    - Priority Queue:
        - Every element is assigned a priority and are processed based on that priority
            - If priorities are equal then the elements follow FIFO
        - Every node contains:
            - Data
            - Priority Value
            - Link to next node
- Application of Queues:
    - Can be used in:
        - CPU Scheduling
        - Printer and Disk Management
        - I/O System Buffers
        - Music Playlists
        - Josephus Problem
- Josephus Problem:
    - Follows the idea that people stand in a circle, and every k-th person is eliminated, continuing until only one person remains. 
        - This can be solved using a circular linked list or queue

## Review Questions
### 1. What is a priority queue? Give its applications.
    A priority queue is a data structure that assigns each element a priority, which determines the order in which elements will be processed.
        - Usually used for CPU scheduling in operating systems
### 2. Explain the concept of a circular queue? How is it better than a linear queue?
     A circular queue is a data structure that connects the last index to index 0 which solves a memory wastage problem of linear queues. Specifically, how after a deletion, when the front moves forward and the freed space it creates, can't be reused.
### 3. Why do we use multiple queues?
    You need multiple queues when working with different types of data, or process them separately, within the same memory space. The use of multiple queues allows for scheduling and, overall, better organization.
### 4. Draw the queue structure in each case when the following operations are preformed on an empty queue.
- **Add `A, B, C, D, E, F` to an empty queue** $\rightarrow$ Front - `A | B C | D| E | F` - Rear
- **Delete 2 letters** $\rightarrow$ Front - `C | D | E | F` - Rear
    - FIFO - First In, First Out
- **Add `G`** $\rightarrow$ Front - `C | D | E | F | G` - Rear
    - Insertion adds to the end of the queue
- **Add `H`** $\rightarrow$ Front - `C | D | E | F | G | H` - Rear
- **Delete 4 letters** $\rightarrow$ Front - `G | H` - Rear
- **Add `I`** $\rightarrow$ Front - `G | H | I` - Rear
### 5. Consider the queue given below which has `FRONT = 1` and `REAR = 5`, preform the following operations on the queue:
> `|  | A | B | C | D | E |  |  |  |  |`
- **Add `F`** $\rightarrow$ `|  | A | B | C | D | E | F |  |  |  |`
- **Delete 2 letters** $\rightarrow$ `|  |  |  | C | D | E | F |  |  |  |`
- **Add `G`** $\rightarrow$ `|  |  |  | C | D | E | F | G |  |  |`
- **Add `H`** $\rightarrow$ `|  |  |  | C | D | E | F | G | H |  |`
- **Delete 4 letters** $\rightarrow$ `|  |  |  |  |  |  |  | G | H |  |`
- **Add `I`** $\rightarrow$ `|  |  |  |  |  |  |  | G | H | I |`
### 6. Consider the dequeue given below which has `LEFT = 1` and `RIGHT = 5`, preform the following operations on the queue:
> `|  | A | B | C | D | E |  |  |  |  |`
- **Add `F` on the left** $\rightarrow$ `| F | A | B | C | D | E |  |  |  |  |`
- **Add `G` on the right** $\rightarrow$ `| F | A | B | C | D | E | G |  |  |  |`
- **Add `H` on the right** $\rightarrow$ `| F | A | B | C | D | E | G | H |  | `
- **Delete two letters from left** $\rightarrow$ `|  |  | B | C | D | E | G    H |  |  |`
- **Add `I` on the right** $\rightarrow$ `|  |  | B | C | D | E | G | H | I |  |`
- **Add `J` on the left** $\rightarrow$ `|  | J | B | C | D | E | G | H | I | |`
- **Delete two letters from right** $\rightarrow$ `|  | J | B | C | D | E | G |  |  |  |`

## Multiple Choice Questions
1. A line in a grocery store represents a 
    * Stack
    * **Queue**
    * Linked List
    * Array
2. In a queue, insertion is done at
    * **Rear**
    * Front
    * Back 
    * Top
3. The function that deletes values from a queue is called
    * Enqueue
    * **Dequeue**
    * pop
    * peek
4. Typical time requirement for operations on queues is 
    * $\mathbf{O(1)}$
    * $O(n)$
    * $O(log n)$
    * $O(n^2)$
5. The circular queue will be full only when
    * `FRONT = MAX - 1` and `REAR = MAX - 1`
    * `FRONT = 0` and `REAR = MAX - 1`
    * **`FRONT = MAX - 1` and `REAR = 0`**
    * `FRONT = 0` and `REAR = 0`

## True or False
1. A queue stores elements in a manner such that the first element is at the beginning of the list
and the last element is at the end of the list.
    > True
2. Elements in a priority queue are processed sequentially.
    > False
3. In a linked queue, a maximum of 100 elements can be added.
    > False 
4. Conceptually a linked queue is same as that of a linear queue.
    > True
5. The size of a linked queue cannot change during run time.
    > False
6. In a priority queue, two elements with the same priority are processed on a FCFS basis.
    > True
7. Output-restricted deque allows deletions to be done only at one end of the dequeue, while insertions can be done at both the ends.
    > True
8. If `FRONT = MAX - 1` and `REAR = 0`, then the circular queue is full.
    > True

## Fill in the Blanks
1. New nodes are added at `___` of the queue.
    - Rear
2. `___` allows insertion of elements at either ends but not in the middle.
     - Deque - Double-Ended Queue
3. The typical time requirement for operations in a linked queue is `___`.
    - $O(1)$
4. In `___`, insertions can be done only at one end, while deletions can be done from both ends. 
    - Input-restricted deque(s)
5. Dequeue is implemented using `___`.
    - Circular array or a doubly linked list
6. `___` are appropriate data structures to process batch computer programs submitted to the computer centre. 
    - Queues
7. `___` are appropriate data structures to process a list of employees having a contract for a seniority system for hiring and firing. 
    - Priority Queue